
PMID- 19280266
TI  - Modeling proximal tubule cell homeostasis: tracking changes in luminal flow.
AB  - During normal kidney function, there are routinely wide swings in proximal tubule
      fluid flow and proportional changes in Na(+) reabsorption across tubule
      epithelial cells. This "glomerulotubular balance" occurs in the absence of any
      substantial change in cell volume, and is thus a challenge to coordinate luminal 
      membrane solute entry with peritubular membrane solute exit. In this work, linear
      optimal control theory is applied to generate a configuration of regulated
      transporters that could achieve this result. A previously developed model of rat 
      proximal tubule epithelium is linearized about a physiologic reference condition;
      the approximate linear system is recast as a dynamical system; and a Riccati
      equation is solved to yield the optimal linear feedback that stabilizes Na(+)
      flux, cell volume, and cell pH. The first observation is that optimal feedback
      control is largely consigned to three physiologic variables, cell volume, cell
      electrical potential, and lateral intercellular hydrostatic pressure. Parameter
      modulation by cell volume stabilizes cell volume; parameter modulation by
      electrical potential or interspace pressure act to stabilize Na(+) flux and cell 
      pH. This feedback control is utilized in a tracking problem, in which
      reabsorptive Na(+) flux varies over a factor of two, in order to represent a
      substantial excursion of glomerulotubular balance. The resulting control
      parameters consist of two terms, an autonomous term and a feedback term, and both
      terms include transporters on both luminal and peritubular cell membranes.
      Overall, the increase in Na(+) flux is achieved with upregulation of luminal
      Na(+)/H(+) exchange and Na(+)-glucose cotransport, with increased peritubular
      Na(+)-3HCO(3)(-) and K(+)-Cl(-) cotransport, and with increased Na(+),
      K(+)-ATPase activity. The configuration of activated transporters emerges as a
      testable hypothesis of the molecular basis for glomerulotubular balance. It is
      suggested that the autonomous control component at each cell membrane could
      represent the cytoskeletal effects of luminal flow.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
AU  - Sontag ED
GR  - R01 DK029857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2793416
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 2009 Aug;71(6):1285-322. doi: 10.1007/s11538-009-9402-1. Epub
      2009 Mar 12.


PMID- 18715938
TI  - A mathematical model of distal nephron acidification: diuretic effects.
AB  - Through their action on the distal nephron (DN), diuretics may produce systemic
      acid-base disturbances: metabolic alkalosis with thiazides or loop diuretics and 
      metabolic acidosis with amiloride. Enhanced acid excretion may be due to a local 
      effect on the diuretic target cell (a shift of Na+ reabsorption from NaCl
      transport to Na+/H+ exchange), or an effect at a distance: namely, increases in
      luminal fluid flow or luminal Na+ concentration may enhance more distal proton
      secretion. Both local and distance effects are supported by micropuncture data.
      In the present work, mathematical models of the distal convoluted tubule
      (DCT)/connecting tubule (CNT) (Weinstein AM, Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 289:
      F721-F741, 2005), and cortical and medullary collecting ducts (CD) (Weinstein AM,
      Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 283: F1237-F1251, 2002) have been concatenated to
      yield a model of rat DN. Among the segments of this DN, the DCT-CNT is
      responsible for the major portion of distal acidification. Predictions from the
      model calculations include the following. 1) With increasing distal Na+ delivery,
      there is little change in net acid excretion, but a shift in acidification locus 
      from shared DCT and CNT contributions, to DCT prominence. 2) Urinary
      acidification by thiazides is primarily local (in the DCT) via the shift in Na+
      reabsorption from NaCl cotransport to entry via NHE2. Increased NaCl delivery to 
      the CNT increases beta-cell HCO3(-) secretion, and thus blunts urine
      acidification. 3) In contrast to conclusions drawn from the isolated CD model,
      inclusion of the CNT now reproduces the observed distal acidification defect
      found with ENaC block, so that this action of amiloride appears to be sufficient 
      to produce "voltage-dependent" distal renal tubular acidosis. 4) The effect of
      furosemide to enhance distal urinary acidification is not reproduced by the model
      without major upregulation of CNT alpha-cell transport, perhaps as a result of
      increased luminal flow.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, 1300 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2584906
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Nov;295(5):F1353-64. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.90356.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 20.


PMID- 19923413
TI  - A mathematical model of rat ascending Henle limb. III. Tubular function.
AB  - K+ plays a catalytic role in AHL Na+ reabsorption via Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter
      (NKCC2), recycling across luminal K+ channels, so that luminal K+ is not
      depleted. Based on models of the ascending Henle limb (AHL) epithelium, it has
      been hypothesized that NH4+ may also catalyze luminal Na+ uptake. This hypothesis
      requires that luminal NH4+ not be depleted, implying replenishment via either
      direct secretion of NH4+, or NH3 in parallel with a proton. In the present work, 
      epithelial models of rat medullary and cortical AHL (Weinstein AM, Krahn TA. Am J
      Physiol Renal Physiol 298: F000-F000, 2009) are configured as tubules and
      examined in simulations of function in vitro and in vivo to assess the
      feasibility of a catalytic role for NH4+ in Na+ reabsorption. Modulation of Na+
      transport is also examined by peritubular K+ concentration and by Bartter-type
      transport defects in NKCC2 (type 1), in luminal membrane K+ channels (type 2),
      and in peritubular Cl- channels (type 3). It is found that a catalytic role for
      NH4+, which is significant in magnitude (relative to K+), is quantitatively
      realistic, in terms of uptake via NKCC2, and in terms of luminal membrane ammonia
      backflux. Simulation of a 90% NKCC2 defect is predicted to double distal Na+
      delivery; it is also predicted to increase distal acid delivery (principally as
      NH4+). With doubling of medullary K+, the model predicts a 30% increase in distal
      Na+ delivery, but in this case there is a decrease in AHL acidification. This
      effect of peritubular K+ on proton secretion appears to be akin to type 3
      Bartter's pathophysiology, in which there is decreased peritubular HCO3- exit,
      cytosolic alkalinization, and a consequent decrease in luminal proton secretion
      by NHE3. One consequence of overlapping and redundant roles for K+ and NH4+, is a
      blunted impact of luminal membrane K+ permeability on overall Na+ reabsorption,
      so that type 2 Bartter pathophysiology is not well captured by the model.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2838601
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):F543-56. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00232.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 18.


PMID- 19923414
TI  - A mathematical model of rat ascending Henle limb. II. Epithelial function.
AB  - A mathematical model of ascending Henle limb (AHL) epithelium has been fashioned 
      using kinetic representations of Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC2), KCC4, and
      type 3 Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE3), with transporter densities selected to yield the 
      reabsorptive Na+ flux expected for rat tubules in vivo. Of necessity, this model 
      predicts fluxes that are higher than those measured in vitro. The kinetics of the
      NKCC and KCC are such that Na+ reabsorption by the model tubule is responsive to 
      variation in luminal NaCl concentration over the range of 30 to 130 mM, with only
      minor changes in cell volume. Peritubular KCC accounts for about half the
      reabsorptive Cl- flux, with the remainder via peritubular Cl- channels.
      Transcellular Na+ flux is turned off by increasing peritubular KCl, which
      produces increased cytosolic Cl- and thus inhibits NKCC2 transport. In the
      presence of physiological concentrations of ammonia, there is a large acid
      challenge to the cell, due primarily to NH4+ entry via NKCC2, with diffusive NH3 
      exit to both lumen and peritubular solutions. When NHE3 density is adjusted to
      compensate this acid challenge, the model predicts luminal membrane proton
      secretion that is greater than the HCO3(-)-reabsorptive fluxes measured in vitro.
      The model also predicts luminal membrane ammonia cycling, with uptake via NKCC2
      or K+ channel, and secretion either as NH4+ by NHE3 or as diffusive NH3 flux in
      parallel with a secreted proton. If such luminal ammonia cycling occurs in vivo, 
      it could act in concert with luminal K+ cycling to facilitate AHL Na+
      reabsorption via NKCC2. With physiological ammonia, peritubular KCl also blunts
      NHE3 activity by inhibiting NH4+ uptake on the Na-K-ATPase, and alkalinizing the 
      cell.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Krahn TA
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2838594
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):F525-42. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00231.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 18.


PMID- 19923415
TI  - A mathematical model of rat ascending Henle limb. I. Cotransporter function.
AB  - Kinetic models of Na+-K+-2Cl- costransporter (NKCC2) and K+-Cl- cotransporter
      (KCC4), two of the key cotransporters of the Henle limb, are fashioned with
      inclusion of terms representing binding and transport of NH4+. The models are
      simplified using assumptions of equilibrium ion binding, binding symmetry, and
      identity of Cl- binding sites. Model parameters are selected to be consistent
      with flux data from expression of these transporters in oocytes, specifically
      inwardly directed coupled transport of rubidium. In the analysis of these models,
      it is found that despite the simplifying assumptions to reduce the number of
      model parameters, neither model is uniquely determined by the data. For NKCC or
      KCC there are two- or three-parameter families of "optimal" solutions. As a
      consequence, one may specify several carrier translocation rates and/or ion
      affinities before fitting the remaining coefficients to the data, with no loss of
      fidelity in simulating the experiments. Model calculations suggest that with
      respect to NKCC2 near its operating point, the curve of ion flux as a function of
      cell Cl- is steep, and with respect to KCC4, its curve of ion flux as a function 
      of peritubular K+ is also steep. The implication is that the kinetics are
      suitable for these two transporters in series to act as a sensor for peritubular 
      K+, to modulate AHL Na+ reabsorption, with cytosolic Cl- as the intermediate
      variable. The models also reveal the potential for luminal NH4+ to be a potent
      catalyst for NKCC2 Na+ reabsorption, provided suitable exit mechanisms for NH4+
      (from cell-to-lumen) are operative. It is found that KCC4 is likely to augment
      the secretory NH4+ flux, with peritubular NH4+ uptake driven by the cell-to-blood
      K+ gradient.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2838604
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):F512-24. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00230.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 18.


PMID- 22114205
TI  - Potassium excretion during antinatriuresis: perspective from a distal nephron
      model.
AB  - Renal excretion of Na(+) and K(+) must be regulated independently within the
      distal nephron, but is complicated by the fact that changing excretion of one
      solute requires adjustments in the transport of both. It is long known that
      hypovolemia increases Na(+) reabsorption while impairing K(+) excretion, even
      when distal Na(+) delivery is little changed. Renewed interest in this
      micropuncture observation came with identification of the molecular defects
      underlying familial hyperkalemic hypertension (FHH), which also increases distal 
      Na(+) reabsorption and impairs K(+) excretion. In this work, a mathematical model
      of the distal nephron (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 295: F1353-F1364,
      2008), including the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), connecting segment (CNT),
      and collecting duct (CD), is used to examine renal K(+) excretion during
      antinatriuresis. Within the model, Na(+) avidity is represented as the modulation
      of DCT NaCl reabsorption, and the K(+) secretion signal is an aldosterone-like
      effect on principal cells of the CNT and CD. The first model prediction is that
      changes in DCT NaCl reabsorption are not mediated by NaCl cotransporter density
      alone, but require additional adjustments of both peritubular Na-K-ATPase and KCl
      cotransport. A second observation is that the CNT response to increased DCT Na(+)
      reabsorption should not only stabilize CD K(+) delivery but also compensate for
      the compromise of K(+) excretion downstream, as low Na(+) delivery increases CD
      K(+) reabsorption. Such anticipatory regulation is seen with the aldosterone
      response of hypovolemia, while the FHH phenotype manifests enhanced DCT NaCl
      transport but a blunted aldosterone effect. The model emphasizes the need for two
      distinct signals to the distal nephron, regulating Na(+) excretion and K(+)
      excretion, in contrast to a single switch apportioning NaCl reabsorption and
      Na(+)-for-K(+) exchange.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Dept. of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell Univ., 1300 
      York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC3311316
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Mar 15;302(6):F658-73. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00528.2011. Epub 2011 Nov 23.


PMID- 2212984
TI  - Volume-activated chloride permeability can mediate cell volume regulation in a
      mathematical model of a tight epithelium.
AB  - Cell volume regulation during anisotonic challenge is investigated in a
      mathematical model of a tight epithelium. The epithelium is represented as
      compliant cellular and paracellular compartments bounded by mucosal and serosal
      bathing media. Model variables include the concentrations of Na, K, and Cl,
      hydrostatic pressure, and electrical potential, and the mass conservation
      equations have been formulated for both steady-state and time-dependent problems.
      Ionic conductance is represented by the Goldman constant field equation (Civan,
      M.M., and R.J. Bookman. 1982. Journal of Membrane Biology. 65:63-80). A
      basolateral cotransporter of Na, K, and Cl with 1:1:2 stoichiometry (Geck, P.,
      and E. Heinz. 1980. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 341:57-62.) and
      volume-activated basolateral ion permeabilities are incorporated in the model.
      MacRobbie and Ussing (1961. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica. 53:348-365.) reported
      that the cells of frog skin exhibit osmotic swelling followed by a volume
      regulatory decrease (VRD) when the serosal bath is diluted to half the initial
      osmolality. Similar regulation is achieved in the model epithelium when both a
      basolateral cotransporter and a volume-activated Cl permeation path are included.
      The observed transepithelial potential changes could only be simulated by
      allowing volume activation of the basolateral K permeation path. The fractional
      VRD, or shrinkage as percent of initial swelling, is examined as a function of
      the hypotonic challenge. The fractional VRD increases with increasing osmotic
      challenge, but eventually declines under the most severe circumstances. This
      analysis demonstrates that the VRD response depends on the presence of adequate
      intracellular chloride stores and the volume sensitivity of the chloride channel.
AU  - Strieter J
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York 10021.
AU  - Stephenson JL
AU  - Palmer LG
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 5-R01-DK-31550/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - DK-27847/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2228989
SO  - J Gen Physiol. 1990 Aug;96(2):319-44.


PMID- 233579
TI  - Electrolyte transport across a simple epithelium. Steady-state and transient
      analysis.
AB  - A simple transporting epithelium is represented as a cellular compartment,
      compliant in all dimensions, and a paracellular channel, of arbitrary shape,
      between well-stirred mucosal ans serosal baths. The equations for mass balance,
      Poiseuille flow, and the Nernst-Planck equation are used to describe the
      continuous behavior of the system along cell and channel, whereas passive
      transport across membranes is given by the relations of Kedem and Katchalsky.
      Time-dependent terms are retained to permit study of transient phenomena.
      Boundary conditions at the baths demand only mass conservation and specify no a
      priori estimates of the system variables. A numerical model containing
      Na+,K+,Cl-, and impermeant cellular anions is formulated with membrane parameters
      taken from the literature on Necturus gallbladder. The differential equations are
      represented as a finite difference scheme and solved using Newton's method. It
      appears that apical cellular NaCl cotransport is necessary to obtain a reasonable
      cell chloride concentration. Investigation of the osmolality of the
      transepithelial flow shows that at steady state a leaky epithelium cannot
      separate baths of substantially different tonicity, although this does not
      guarantee isotonic transport between equiosmolar media. Changes in bath pressure,
      application of transepithelial electrical potential, and simulation of
      ion-substitution experiments are performed to understand the role of membrane
      permeabilities in determining the dynamic behavior of the epithelium.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Stephenson JL
PMC - PMC1328576
SO  - Biophys J. 1979 Aug;27(2):165-86.


PMID- 3559518
TI  - Convective paracellular solute flux. A source of ion-ion interaction in the
      epithelial transport equations.
AB  - An electrolyte model of an epithelium (a cell and a tight junction in parallel,
      both in series with a lateral interspace basement membrane) is analyzed using the
      formalism of nonequilibrium thermodynamics. It is shown that if the parallel
      structures are heteroporous (i.e., reflection coefficients for two ion species
      differ between the components), then a cross-term will appear in the overall
      transport equations of the epithelium. Formally, this cross-term represents an
      ion-ion interaction. With respect to the rat proximal tubule, data indicating
      epithelial ionic reflection coefficients less than unity, together with the
      assumption of no transcellular solvent drag, imply the presence of convective
      paracellular solute flux. This means that a model applicable to a heteroporous
      structure must be used to represent the tubule, and, in particular, the
      cross-terms for ion-ion interaction must also be evaluated in permeability
      determinations. A series of calculations is presented that permits the estimation
      of the Na-Cl interaction for rat proximal tubule from available experimental
      data. One consequence of tubule heteroporosity is that an electrical potential
      may be substantially less effective than an equivalent concentration gradient in 
      driving reabsorptive ion fluxes.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-R01-AM29857/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2215903
SO  - J Gen Physiol. 1987 Mar;89(3):501-18.


PMID- 6652211
TI  - Nonequilibrium thermodynamic model of the rat proximal tubule epithelium.
AB  - The rat proximal tubule epithelium is represented as well-stirred, compliant
      cellular and paracellular compartments bounded by mucosal and serosal bathing
      solutions. With a uniform pCO2 throughout the epithelium, the model variables
      include the concentrations of Na, K, Cl, HCO3, H2PO4, HPO4, and H, as well as
      hydrostatic pressure and electrical potential. Except for a metabolically driven 
      Na-K exchanger at the basolateral cell membrane, all membrane transport within
      the epithelium is passive and is represented by the linear equations of
      nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In particular, this includes the cotransport of
      Na-Cl and Na-H2PO4 and countertransport of Na-H at the apical cell membrane.
      Experimental constraints on the choice of ionic conductivities are satisfied by
      allowing K-Cl cotransport at the basolateral membrane. The model equations
      include those for mass balance of the nonreacting species, as well as chemical
      equilibrium for the acidification reactions. Time-dependent terms are retained to
      permit the study of transient phenomena. In the steady state the energy
      dissipation is computed and verified equal to the sum of input from the Na-K
      exchanger plus the Gibbs free energy of mass addition to the system. The
      parameter dependence of coupled water transport is studied and shown to be
      consistent with the predictions of previous analytical models of the lateral
      intercellular space. Water transport in the presence of an end-proximal
      (HCO3-depleted) luminal solution is investigated. Here the lower permeability and
      higher reflection coefficient of HCO3 enhance net sodium and water transport. Due
      to enhanced flux across the tight junction, this process may permit proximal
      tubule Na transport to proceed with diminished energy dissipation.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1-AM-29857-01/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC1434827
SO  - Biophys J. 1983 Nov;44(2):153-70.


PMID- 7658195
TI  - A kinetically defined Na+/H+ antiporter within a mathematical model of the rat
      proximal tubule.
AB  - The luminal membrane antiporter of the proximal tubule has been represented using
      the kinetic formulation of E. Heinz (1978. Mechanics and Engergetics of
      Biological Transport. Springer-Verlag, Berlin) with the assumption of equilibrium
      binding and 1:1 stoichiometry. Competitive binding and transport of NH+4 is
      included within this model. Ion affinities and permeation velocities were
      selected in a least-squares fit to the kinetic parameters determined
      experimentally in renal membrane vesicles (Aronson, P.S., M.A. Suhm, and J. Nee. 
      1983. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 258:6767-6771). The modifier role of
      internal H+ to enhance transport beyond the expected kinetics (Aronson, P.S., J. 
      Nee, and M. A. Suhm. 1982. Nature. 299:161-163) is represented as a velocity
      effect of H+ binding to a single site. This kinetic formulation of the Na+/H+
      antiporter was incorporated within a model of the rat proximal tubule (Weinstein,
      A. M. 1994. American Journal of Physiology. 267:F237-F248) as a replacement for
      the representation by linear nonequilibrium thermodynamics (NET). The membrane
      density of the antiporter was selected to yield agreement with the rate of
      tubular Na+ reabsorption. Simulation of 0.5 cm of tubule predicts that the
      activity of the Na+/H+ antiporter is the most important force for active
      secretion of ammonia. Model calculations of metabolic acid-base disturbances are 
      performed and comparison is made among antiporter representations (kinetic model,
      kinetic model without internal modifier, and NET formulation). It is found that
      the ability to sharply turn off Na+/H+ exchange in cellular alkalosis
      substantially eliminates the cell volume increase associated with high HCO3-
      conditions. In the tubule model, diminished Na+/H+ exchange in alkalosis blunts
      the axial decrease in luminal HCO3- and thus diminishes paracellular reabsorption
      of Cl-. In this way, the kinetics of the Na+/H+ antiporter could act to enhance
      distal delivery of Na+, Cl-, and HCO3- in acute metabolic alkalosis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021, USA.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC2216949
SO  - J Gen Physiol. 1995 May;105(5):617-41.


PMID- 25694480
TI  - A mathematical model of the rat nephron: glucose transport.
AB  - Mathematical models of the proximal tubule (PT), loop of Henle (LOH), and distal 
      nephron have been combined to simulate transport by rat renal tubules. The
      ensemble is composed of 24,000 superficial (SF) nephrons and 12,000
      juxtamedullary (JM) nephrons in 5 classes (according to LOH length); all coalesce
      into 7,200 connecting tubules (CNT). Medullary interstitial solute concentrations
      are specified. The model equations require that each nephron glomerular
      filtration rate (GFR) satisfies a tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF) relationship,
      and each initial hydrostatic pressure yields a common CNT pressure; that common
      CNT pressure is determined from an overall distal hydraulic resistance to flow.
      By virtue of the greater GFR for JM nephrons, fluid delivery to SF and JM tubules
      is comparable. Glucose reabsorption is restricted to the PT, cotransported with
      one Na in the convoluted tubule (SGLT2), and two Na in the straight tubule
      (SGLT1). Increasing ambient glucose from 5 to 10 mM increases proximal Na
      reabsorption and decreases distal delivery. This is mitigated by a TGF-mediated
      increase in GFR, and may thus be an etiology for TGF-mediated glomerular
      hyperfiltration. With SGLT2 inhibition by 95%, the model predicts that under
      normoglycemic conditions about 60% of filtered glucose will still be reabsorbed, 
      so that profound glycosuria is not to be expected. Compared with glucose-driven
      osmotic diuresis, SGLT2 inhibition provokes greater natriuresis. When
      hyperglycemia is superimposed on SGLT2 inhibition, the model suggests that
      natriuresis may be severe, reflecting synergy of a proximal diuretic and osmotic 
      diuresis. In sum, the model captures TGF-mediated diabetic hyperfiltration and
      predicts glomerular protection with SGLT2 inhibition.
CI  - Copyright (c) 2015 the American Physiological Society.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Department of Medicine, Weill Medical
      College of Cornell University, New York, New York alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu.
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC4437004
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 May 15;308(10):F1098-118. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00505.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

PMID- 25694479
TI  - A mathematical model of rat proximal tubule and loop of Henle.
AB  - Proximal tubule and loop of Henle function are coupled, with proximal transport
      determining loop fluid composition, and loop transport modulating glomerular
      filtration via tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF). To examine this interaction, we
      begin with published models of the superficial rat proximal convoluted tubule
      (PCT; including flow-dependent transport in a compliant tubule), and the rat
      thick ascending Henle limb (AHL). Transport parameters for this PCT are scaled
      down to represent the proximal straight tubule (PST), which is connected to the
      thick AHL via a short descending limb. Transport parameters for superficial PCT
      and PST are scaled up for a juxtamedullary nephron, and connected to AHL via
      outer and inner medullary descending limbs, and inner medullary thin AHL.
      Medullary interstitial solute concentrations are specified. End-AHL hydrostatic
      pressure is determined by distal nephron flow resistance, and the TGF signal is
      represented as a linear function of end-AHL cytosolic Cl concentration. These two
      distal conditions required iterative solution of the model. Model calculations
      capture inner medullary countercurrent flux of urea, and also suggest the
      presence of an outer medullary countercurrent flux of ammonia, with reabsorption 
      in AHL and secretion in PST. For a realistically strong TGF signal, there is the 
      expected homeostatic impact on distal flows, and in addition, a homeostatic
      effect on proximal tubule pressure. The model glycosuria threshold is compatible 
      with rat data, and predicted glucose excretion with selective 1Na(+):1glucose
      cotransporter (SGLT2) inhibition comports with observations in the mouse. Model
      calculations suggest that enhanced proximal tubule Na(+) reabsorption during
      hyperglycemia is sufficient to activate TGF and contribute to diabetic
      hyperfiltration.
CI  - Copyright (c) 2015 the American Physiological Society.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Department of Medicine, Weill Medical
      College of Cornell University, New York, New York alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu.
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
PMC - PMC4437000
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 May 15;308(10):F1076-97. doi:
      10.1152/ajprenal.00504.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 18.


PMID- 10894785
TI  - A mathematical model of the outer medullary collecting duct of the rat.
AB  - A mathematical model of the outer medullary collecting duct (OMCD) has been
      developed, consisting of alpha-intercalated cells and a paracellular pathway, and
      which includes Na(+), K(+), Cl(-), HCO(3)(-), CO(2), H(2)CO(3), phosphate,
      ammonia, and urea. Proton secretion across the luminal cell membrane is mediated 
      by both H(+)-ATPase and H-K-ATPase, with fluxes through the H-K-ATPase given by a
      previously developed kinetic model (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 274:
      F856-F867, 1998). The flux across each ATPase is substantial, and variation in
      abundance of either pump can be used to control OMCD proton secretion. In
      comparison with the H(+)-ATPase, flux through the H-K-ATPase is relatively
      insensitive to changes in lumen pH, so as luminal acidification proceeds, proton 
      secretion shifts toward this pathway. Peritubular HCO(3)(-) exit is via a
      conductive pathway and via the Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchanger, AE1. To represent AE1, 
      a kinetic model has been developed based on transport studies obtained at 38
      degrees C in red blood cells. (Gasbjerg PK, Knauf PA, and Brahm J. J Gen Physiol 
      108: 565-575, 1996; Knauf PA, Gasbjerg PK, and Brahm J. J Gen Physiol 108:
      577-589, 1996). Model calculations indicate that if all of the chloride entry via
      AE1 recycles across a peritubular chloride channel and if this channel is
      anything other than highly selective for chloride, then it should conduct a
      substantial fraction of the bicarbonate exit. Since both luminal membrane proton 
      pumps are sensitive to small changes in cytosolic pH, variation in density of
      either AE1 or peritubular anion conductance can modulate OMCD proton secretory
      rate. With respect to the OMCD in situ, available buffer is predicted to be
      abundant, including delivered HCO(3)(-) and HPO(4)(2-), as well as peritubular
      NH(3). Thus, buffer availability is unlikely to exert a regulatory role in total 
      proton secretion by this tubule segment.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000 Jul;279(1):F24-45.


PMID- 10997920
TI  - A hydrodynamic mechanosensory hypothesis for brush border microvilli.
AB  - In the proximal tubule of the kidney, Na(+) and HCO(3)(-) reabsorption vary
      proportionally with changes in axial flow rate. This feature is a critical
      component of glomerulotubular balance, but the basic mechanism by which the
      tubule epithelial cells sense axial flow remains unexplained. We propose that the
      microvilli, which constitute the brush border, are physically suitable to act as 
      a mechanosensor of fluid flow. To examine this hypothesis quantitatively, we have
      developed an elastohydrodynamic model to predict the forces and torques along
      each microvillus and its resulting elastic bending deformation. This model
      indicates that: 1) the spacing of the microvilli is so dense that there is
      virtually no axial velocity within the brush border and that drag forces on the
      microvilli are at least 200 times greater than the shear force on the cell's
      apical membrane at the base of the microvilli; 2) of the total drag on a
      2.5-microm microvillus, 74% appears within 0.2 microm from the tip; and 3)
      assuming that the structural strength of the microvillus derives from its axial
      actin filaments, then a luminal fluid flow of 30 nl/min produces a deflection of 
      the microvillus tip which varies from about 1 to 5% of its 90-nm diameter,
      depending on the microvilli length. The microvilli thus appear as a set of stiff 
      bristles, in a configuration in which changes in drag will produce maximal
      torque.
AU  - Guo P
AD  - CUNY Graduate School and Center for Biomedical Engineering, the City College of
      the City University of New York, New York 10031, USA.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Weinbaum S
GR  - R01DK29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000 Oct;279(4):F698-712.


PMID- 11352847
TI  - A mathematical model of rat cortical collecting duct: determinants of the
      transtubular potassium gradient.
AB  - In assessing disorders of potassium excretion, urine composition is used to
      calculate the transtubular gradient (TTKG), as an estimate of tubule fluid
      concentration, at a point when the fluid was last isotonic to plasma, namely,
      within the cortical collecting duct (CCD). A mathematical model of the CCD has
      been developed, consisting of principal cells and alpha- and beta-intercalated
      cells, and which includes Na(+), K(+), Cl(-), HCO, CO(2), H(2)CO(3), phosphate,
      ammonia, and urea. Parameters have been selected to achieve fluxes and
      permeabilities compatible with data obtained from perfusion studies of rat CCD
      under the influence of both antidiuretic hormone and mineralocorticoid. Both
      epithelial (flat sheet) and tubule models have been configured, and model
      calculations have focused on the determinants of the TTKG. Using the epithelial
      model, luminal K(+) concentrations can be computed at which K(+) secretion ceases
      (0-flux equilibrium), and this luminal concentration derives from the magnitude
      of principal cell peritubular uptake of K(+) via the Na-K-ATPase, relative to
      principal cell peritubular membrane K(+) permeability. When the model is
      configured as a tubule and examined in the context of conditions in vivo, osmotic
      equilibration of luminal fluid produces a doubling of the initial K(+)
      concentration, which, depending on delivered load, may be substantially greater
      than the zero-flux equilibrium value. Under such circumstances, the CCD will be a
      site for K(+) reabsorption, although the relatively low permeability ensures that
      this reabsorptive flux is likely to be small. Osmotic equilibration may also
      raise luminal NH(3) concentrations well above those in cortical blood. In this
      situation, diffusive reabsorption of NH(3) provides a mechanism for base
      reclamation without the metabolic cost of active proton secretion.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021, USA.
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2001 Jun;280(6):F1072-92.


PMID- 12388378
TI  - A mathematical model of rat collecting duct. I. Flow effects on transport and
      urinary acidification.
AB  - A mathematical model of the rat collecting duct (CD) has been developed by
      concatenating previously published models of cortical (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol
      Renal Physiol 280: F1072-F1092, 2001); outer medullary (Weinstein AM. Am J
      Physiol Renal Physiol 279: F24-F45, 2000); and inner medullary segments
      (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 274: F841-F855, 1998). Starting with
      end-distal tubular flow rate and composition, plus interstitial solute profiles, 
      the model predicts urinary solute flows, including the buffer concentrations
      required to assess net acid excretion. In the model CD, the interstitial
      corticomedullary osmotic gradient provides the basis for the flow effect on the
      transport of several solutes. For substances that have an interstitial
      accumulation and that can have diffusive secretion (e.g., urea and NH(4)(+)),
      enhanced luminal flow increases excretion by decreasing luminal accumulation. For
      substances that are reabsorbed (e.g., K+ and HCO(3)(-)), and for which luminal
      accumulation can enhance reabsorption, increasing luminal flow again increases
      excretion by decreasing luminal solute concentration. In model calculations,
      flow-dependent increases in HCO(3)(-) and NH(4)(+) approximately balance, so net 
      acid excretion is little changed by flow, albeit at a higher urinary pH. The
      model identifies delivery flow rate to the CD as a potent determinant of urinary 
      pH, with high flows blunting maximal acidification. At even modestly high flows
      (9 nl x min-1. tubule-1, with 6% of filtered Na+ entering the CD), the model
      cannot achieve a urinary pH <5.5 unless the delivered HCO(3)(-) concentration is 
      extremely low (<2 mM). Nevertheless, simulation of Na2SO4 diuresis does yield
      both an increase in net acid excretion and a decrease in urinary HCO(3)(-) (i.e.,
      a decrease in pH) despite the increase in urinary flow. This model should provide
      a tool for examining hypotheses regarding transport defects underlying distal
      renal tubular acidosis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021, USA. alan@nepron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Dec;283(6):F1237-51. Epub 2002 Aug 6.


PMID- 12388379
TI  - A mathematical model of rat collecting duct. II. Effect of buffer delivery on
      urinary acidification.
AB  - A mathematical model of the rat collecting duct (CD) is used to examine the
      effect of delivered load of bicarbonate and nonbicarbonate buffer on urinary
      acidification. Increasing the delivered load of HCO(3)(-) produces
      bicarbonaturia, and, with luminal carbonic anhydrase absent, induces a
      disequilibrium luminal pH and a postequilibration increase in urinary PCO2. At
      baseline flows, this disequilibrium disappears when luminal carbonic anhydrase
      rate coefficients reach 1% of full catalysis. The magnitude of the equilibration 
      PCO2 depends on the product of urinary acid phosphate concentration and the
      disequilibrium pH. Thus, although increasing phosphate delivery to the CD
      decreases the disequilibrium pH, the increase in urinary phosphate concentration 
      yields an overall increase in postequilibration PCO2. In simulations of
      experimental HCO(3)(-) loading in the rat, model predictions of urinary PCO2
      exceed the measured PCO2 of bladder urine. In part, the higher model predictions 
      for urinary PCO2 may reflect higher urinary flow rates and lower urinary
      phosphate concentrations in the experimental preparations. However, when
      simulation of CD function during HCO(3)(-) loading acknowledges the high ambient 
      renal medullary PCO2 (5), the predicted urinary PCO2 of the model CD is yet that 
      much greater. This discrepancy cannot be resolved within the model but requires
      additional experimental data, namely, concomitant determination of urinary buffer
      concentrations within the tubule fluid sampled for PCO2 and pH. This model should
      provide a means for simulating formal testing of urinary acidification and thus
      for examining hypotheses regarding transport defects underlying distal renal
      tubular acidosis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Dec;283(6):F1252-66. Epub 2002 Aug 6.


PMID- 12388380
TI  - A mathematical model of rat collecting duct. III. Paradigms for distal
      acidification defects.
AB  - The present clinical taxonomy of distal renal tubular acidoses includes
      "gradient," "secretory," and "voltage" defects. These categories refer to
      presumed collecting duct defects in which the epithelium may be abnormally
      permeable and unable to sustain an ion gradient, in which luminal proton ATPases 
      are defective, or in which electrogenic Na+ reabsorption is impaired and luminal 
      electronegativity is reduced. Classification of affected individuals is based on 
      urinary pH and ion concentrations during spontaneous acidosis and during
      SO(4)(2-) infusion, as well as urinary PCO2 during HCO(3)(-) loading. A model of 
      rat CD has been developed that has been used to examine determinants of urinary
      acidification (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 283: F1252-F1266, 2002)
      and the interplay of HCO(3)(-) and PO(4)(3-) loads to generate a disequlibrium pH
      and equilibrium PCO2. In this paper, pure forms of gradient, voltage, and
      secretory defects are simulated, with attention to variability in the locus of
      the defect in the cortical (CCD), outer medullary (OMCD), or inner medullary
      collecting duct (IMCD). The objective of these calculations is to discover
      whether the intuitive description of these defects is sustained quantitatively.
      The most important positive finding is that the locus of the transport defect
      along the CD plays a critical role in the apparent severity of the lesion, with
      more proximal defects being less severe and more easily correctable. In
      particular, model calculations suggest that for gradient or secretory defects to 
      be clinically detectable they need to involve the OMCD and/or IMCD. Additionally,
      the calculations reveal a possible mechanism for CD K+ wasting, which does not
      involve failure of H+ - K+-ATPase but derives from a paracellular anion leak and 
      thereby a more electronegative lumen. The most important negative finding is the 
      lack of support for the category of renal tubular acidosis associated with a
      voltage defect. Although CD lesions that present with both K+ and H+ secretory
      defects suggest mediation by transepithelial electrical potential difference
      (PD), both PD changes and proton pump PD sensitivity appear too small to account 
      for the observed abnormalities.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Dec;283(6):F1267-80. Epub 2002 Aug 6.


PMID- 12670832
TI  - A dual-pathway ultrastructural model for the tight junction of rat proximal
      tubule epithelium.
AB  - A dual-pathway model is proposed for transport across the tight junction (TJ) in 
      rat proximal tubule: large slit breaks formed by infrequent discontinuities in
      the TJ complex and numerous small circular pores, with spacing similar to that of
      claudin-2. This dual-pathway model is developed in the context of a proximal
      tubule model (Weinstein AM. Am J Physiol Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol 247:
      F848-F862, 1984) to provide an ultrastructural view of solute and water fluxes.
      Tubule model paramters (TJ reflection coefficient and water permeability), plus
      the measured epithelial NaCl and sucrose permeabilities, provide constraints for 
      the dual-pathway model, which yields the small-pore radius and spacing and large 
      slit height and area. For a small-pore spacing of 20.2 nm, comparable to the
      distance between adjacent particle pairs in apposing TJ strands, the small-pore
      radius is 0.668 nm and the large slit breaks have a height of 19.6 nm, occupying 
      0.04% of the total TJ length. This pore/slit geometry also satisfies the measured
      permeability for mannitol. The numerous small circular pores account for 91.25%
      of TJ NaCl permeability but only 5.0% of TJ water permeability. The infrequent
      large slit breaks in the TJ account for 95.0% of TJ water permeability but only
      8.7% of TJ NaCl permeability. Sucrose and mannitol (4.6- and 3.6-A radius) can
      pass through both the large slit breaks and the small pores. For sucrose, 78.3%
      of the flux is via the slits and 21.7% via the pores; for mannitol, the flux is
      split nearly evenly between the two pathways, 50.8 and 49.2%. In this
      ultrastructural model, the TJ water permeability is 21.2% of the entire
      transepithelial water permeability and thus an order of magnitude greater than
      that predicted by the single-pore/slit theory (Preisig PA and Berry CA. Am J
      Physiol Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol 249: F124-F131, 1985).
AU  - Guo P
AD  - CUNY Graduate School and New York Center for Biomedical Engineering, Department
      of Mechanical Engineering, The City College of the City University of New York,
      New York 10031, USA.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Weinbaum S
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 Aug;285(2):F241-57. Epub 2003 Apr 1.


PMID- 12676732
TI  - Mathematical models of renal fluid and electrolyte transport: acknowledging our
      uncertainty.
AB  - Mathematical models of renal tubular function, with detail at the cellular level,
      have been developed for most nephron segments, and these have generally been
      successful at capturing the overall bookkeeping of solute and water transport.
      Nevertheless, considerable uncertainty remains about important transport events
      along the nephron. The examples presented include the role of proximal tubule
      tight junctions in water transport and in regulation of Na(+) transport, the
      mechanism by which axial flow in proximal tubule modulates solute reabsorption,
      the effect of formate on proximal Cl(-) transport, the assessment of potassium
      transport along collecting duct segments inaccessible to micropuncture, the
      assignment of pathways for peritubular Cl(-) exit in outer medullary collecting
      duct, and the interaction of carbonic anhydrase-sensitive and -insensitive
      pathways for base exit from inner medullary collecting duct. Some of these
      uncertainties have had intense experimental interest well before they were cast
      as modeling problems. Indeed, many of the renal tubular models have been
      developed based on data acquired over two or three decades. Nevertheless, some
      uncertainties have been delineated as the result of model exploration and
      represent communications from the modelers back to the experimental community
      that certain issues should not be considered closed. With respect to model
      refinement, incorporating more biophysical detail about individual transporters
      will certainly enhance model reliability, but ultimate confidence in tubular
      models will still be contingent on experimental development of critical
      information at the tubular level.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, New York, New York 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 May;284(5):F871-84.


PMID- 1443169
TI  - Chloride transport in a mathematical model of the rat proximal tubule.
AB  - The proximal tubule model of this laboratory [Am. J. Physiol. 250 (Renal Fluid
      Electrolyte Physiol. 19): F860-F873, 1986] has been updated to examine proposed
      pathways for Cl- transport. Two additional buffer pairs have been added, i.e.,
      HCO2-/H2CO2 and NH3/NH4+. At the luminal cell membrane Cl-/HCO2- and Cl-/HCO3-
      exchange are considered as pathways for Cl- entry, whereas at the peritubular
      membrane, Cl- exit occurs by either Na(+)-2HCO3-/Cl- exchange or K(+)-Cl-
      cotransport. Calculations with this model indicate that absolute proximal
      reabsorption of both Na+ and Cl- are critically dependent on the rate of luminal 
      Na+/H+ exchange. In contrast, increases in the coefficient for Cl-/HCO2- exchange
      have little impact on overall Cl- flux, but, by enhancing base secretion, limit
      the depression of end-proximal HCO3-. Model calculations confirm those of Preisig
      and Alpern (J. Clin. Invest. 83: 1859-1867, 1989) showing that their measured
      value of luminal membrane H2CO2 permeability is inadequate to sustain the
      transcellular Cl- flux as Cl-/HCO2- exchange. Conversely, with sufficiently high 
      H2CO2 permeability, luminal Cl- uptake is enhanced along the tubule, as HCO2-
      secretion and luminal acidification increase luminal H2CO2 to values severalfold 
      greater than in glomerular filtrate. At the basolateral membrane, the
      thermodynamic driving force across the Na(+)-2HCO3-/Cl- exchanger is small.
      Although its contribution to steady-state Cl- exit may be less than the K(+)-Cl- 
      cotransporter, the Na(+)-2HCO3-/Cl- exchanger can be a mechanism by which
      cytosolic acidification enhances peritubular Cl- transport, when luminal
      acidification enhances luminal Cl- uptake. A simulation is presented in which
      impermeant replacement of luminal Na+ leads to enhanced convective Cl- flux
      across the tight junction and alkalinization of the lateral interspace. In this
      setting, cytosolic Cl- depletion via the Na(+)-2HCO3-/Cl- exchanger may mimic
      luminal membrane Na(+)-Cl- cotransport.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1992 Nov;263(5 Pt 2):F784-98.


PMID- 1481883
TI  - A mathematical model of the rabbit cortical collecting tubule.
AB  - The epithelium of the cortical collecting tubule of the rabbit is represented as 
      four well-stirred compliant compartments corresponding to principal cell, alpha- 
      and beta-intercalated cells, and lateral interspace. Model variables include the 
      concentrations of Na, K, Cl, and HCO3, pH, cell volume, and electrical potential.
      The model equations specify mass conservation and chemical equilibrium for buffer
      reactions. Ionic conductance is represented by the Goldman constant-field
      equation. For the intercalated cells, phenomenological expressions describing the
      proton pumps are structured to agree with data of O. S. Andersen, J. E. N.
      Silveira, and P. R. Steinmetz (J. Gen. Physiol. 86: 215-234, 1985) in the turtle 
      bladder. Coupled transport via Na/H and Cl/HCO3 exchangers is represented
      according to the formalism of linear nonequilibrium thermodynamics. To construct 
      the tubule model, the flat epithelium is wrapped into a cylinder, creating a
      luminal compartment. Luminal variables include volume flow, hydrostatic pressure,
      electrical potential, and ionic concentrations. A specific aim of this
      investigation was to simulate the capability of the epithelium to maintain Na
      reabsorption in the presence of low luminal salt concentration. In this regard,
      critical features of the model include tight junctional conductance and the
      apical Na permeability of the principal cell. In particular, we examine a
      principal cell apical Na permeability inversely dependent on luminal and
      intracellular Na concentrations (M. M. Civan and R. J. Bookman. J. Membr. Biol.
      65: 63-80, 1982). This concentration-dependent permeability together with a low
      junctional conductance produces three results congruent with experimental data:
      1) dilution of luminal Na and maintenance of reabsorptive Na transport despite a 
      steep transtubular gradient, 2) a relatively constant level of K secretion over a
      wide range of luminal Na concentrations, and 3) a relatively constant
      transepithelial potential over this range of luminal Na.
AU  - Strieter J
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021.
AU  - Stephenson JL
AU  - Giebisch G
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - 5-R01-DK-31550/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - P01-AM-17433/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1992 Dec;263(6 Pt 2):F1063-75.


PMID- 1481884
TI  - Regulation of K transport in a mathematical model of the cortical collecting
      tubule.
AB  - The effect of luminal flow rate and peritubular pH on Na and K transport is
      investigated in a mathematical model of the rabbit cortical collecting tubule.
      The model is used to simulate a 0.4-cm segment of tubule comprised of principal
      cell, alpha- and beta-intercalated cells, and lateral interspace. Calculations
      produce luminal profiles of Na, K, Cl, HCO3, and phosphate, as well as of
      electrical potential and pH. Parameter sets are developed that permit
      representation of both unstimulated and deoxycorticosterone acetate-stimulated
      tubules. A series of simulations is performed in which initial luminal flow rate 
      is varied over the range of values between 0.1 and 30 nl/min. A marked
      flow-dependent enhancement of Na reabsorption and K secretion is seen, especially
      at lower flows, while Cl and HCO3 transport remain relatively constant. In
      experimental studies, it has been observed that metabolic alkalosis stimulates
      and metabolic acidosis inhibits K secretion, while leaving Na transport
      relatively unaffected [B. A. Stanton and G. Giebisch. Am. J. Physiol. 242 (Renal 
      Fluid Electrolyte Physiol. 11): F544-F551, 1982; K. Tabei, S. Muto, Y. Ando, Y.
      Sakairi, and Y. Asano. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 1: 693, 1990; and K. Tabei, S. Muto, 
      H. Furuya, and Y. Asano. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2: 752, 1991]. Model calculations
      indicate that, when ion permeabilities are fixed and not dependent on pH, the
      impact of peritubular HCO3 on K secretion cannot be simulated. When junctional Cl
      permeability decreases with increasing interspace pH (E. M. Wright and J. M.
      Diamond. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 163: 57-74, 1968) in the model, there is a marked
      stimulation of K secretion with alkalosis and inhibition with acidosis.
      Furthermore, inclusion of a pH-dependent apical Na permeability [L. G. Palmer and
      G. Frindt. Am. J. Physiol. 253 (Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol. 22): F333-F339, 
      1987] that increases with increasing principal cell pH significantly reduces the 
      change in Na+ reabsorption seen with the pH-dependent junctional Cl permeability 
      alone. In these calculations, a pH-dependent apical K permeability [W. Wang, A.
      Schwab, and G. Giebisch. Am. J. Physiol. 259 (Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol.
      28): F494-F502, 1990] that increases with increasing principal cell pH shows
      relatively little impact on K secretion.
AU  - Strieter J
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Giebisch G
AU  - Stephenson JL
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - 5-R01-DK-31550/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - P01-AM-17433/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1992 Dec;263(6 Pt 2):F1076-86.


PMID- 15294423
TI  - Modeling epithelial cell homeostasis: assessing recovery and control mechanisms.
AB  - Critical to epithelial cell viability is prompt and direct recovery, following a 
      perturbation of cellular conditions. Although a number of transporters are known 
      to be activated by changes in cell volume, cell pH, or cell membrane potential,
      their importance to cellular homeostasis has been difficult to establish.
      Moreover, the coordination among such regulated transporters to enhance recovery 
      has received no attention in mathematical models of cellular function. In this
      paper, a previously developed model of proximal tubule (Weinstein, 1992, Am. J.
      Physiol. 263, F784-F798), has been approximated by its linearization about a
      reference condition. This yields a system of differential equations and auxiliary
      linear equations, which estimate cell volume and composition and transcellular
      fluxes in response to changes in bath conditions or membrane transport
      coefficients. Using the singular value decomposition, this system is reduced to a
      linear dynamical system, which is stable and reproduces the full model behavior
      in a useful neighborhood of the reference. Cost functions on trajectories
      formulated in the model variables (e.g., time for cell volume recovery) are
      translated into cost functions for the dynamical system. When the model is
      extended by the inclusion of linear dependence of membrane transport coefficients
      on model variables, the impact of each such controller on the recovery cost can
      be estimated with the solution of a Lyapunov matrix equation. Alternatively,
      solution of an algebraic Riccati equation provides the ensemble of controllers
      that constitute optimal state feedback for the dynamical system. When translated 
      back into the physiological variables, the optimal controller contains some
      expected components, as well as unanticipated controllers of uncertain
      significance. This approach provides a means of relating cellular homeostasis to 
      optimization of a dynamical system.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.
      alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 2004 Sep;66(5):1201-40.


PMID- 15855658
TI  - A mathematical model of rat distal convoluted tubule. II. Potassium secretion
      along the connecting segment.
AB  - A simulation of the rat distal convoluted tubule (DCT) is completed with a model 
      of the late portion, or connecting tubule (CNT). This CNT model is developed by
      relying on a prior cortical collecting duct (CCD) model (Weinstein AM. Am J
      Physiol Renal Physiol 280: F1072-F1092, 2001), and scaling up transport activity 
      of the three cell types to a level appropriate for DCT. The major difference
      between the two tubule segments is the lower CNT water permeability. In early CNT
      the luminal solution is hypotonic, with a K(+) concentration less than that of
      plasma, and it is predicted that osmotic equilibration requires the whole length 
      of CNT, to end with a nearly isotonic fluid, whose K(+) concentration is
      severalfold greater than plasma. With respect to potassium secretion, early CNT
      conditions are conducive to maximal fluxes, whereas late conditions require the
      capacity to transport against a steep electrochemical gradient. The parameter
      dependence for K(+) secretion under each condition is different: maximal
      secretion depends on luminal membrane K(+) permeability, but the limiting luminal
      K(+) concentration does not. However, maximal secretion and the limiting gradient
      are both enhanced by greater Na(+) reabsorption. While higher CNT water
      permeability depresses K(+) secretion, it favors Na(+) reabsorption. Thus in
      antidiuresis there is a trade-off between enhanced Na(+)-dependent K(+) secretion
      and the attenuation of K(+) secretion by slow flow. When the CNT model is
      configured in series with the early DCT, thiazide diuretics promote renal K(+)
      wasting by shifting Na(+) reabsorption from early DCT to CNT; they promote
      alkalosis by shifting the remaining early DCT Na(+) reabsorption to Na(+)/H(+)
      exchange. This full DCT is suitable for simulating the defects of hyperkalemic
      hypertension, but the model offers no suggestion of a tight junction abnormality 
      that might contribute to the phenotype.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Dept of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
      1300 York Ave., NewYork, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):F721-41. Epub 2005 Apr 26.


PMID- 15855659
TI  - A mathematical model of rat distal convoluted tubule. I. Cotransporter function
      in early DCT.
AB  - A model of rat early distal convoluted tubule (DCT) is developed in conjunction
      with a kinetic representation of the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (TSC).
      Realistic constraints on cell membrane electrical conductance require that most
      of the peritubular Cl(-) reabsorption proceeds via a KCl cotransporter,along with
      most of the K(+) recycled from the Na-K-ATPase. The model tubule reproduces the
      saturable Cl(-) reabsorption of DCT but not the micropuncture finding of linear
      Na(+) flux in response to load, more likely a feature of late DCT (CNT). As in
      proximal tubule, early DCT HCO(3)(-) reabsorption is mediated by a luminal
      Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (NHE), but in contrast to proximal tubule, the DCT exchanger
      is operating closer to equilibrium. In the model DCT, two consequences of the
      lesser driving force for NHE exchange are an acidic cytosol and wider swings in
      NHE flux with perturbations of luminal composition. Variations in luminal NaCl
      provide a challenge to cell volume, which can be blunted by volume dependence of 
      the KCl cotransporter. Cell swelling can also be induced by increases in
      peritubular K(+) concentration. In this case, volume-dependent inhibition of TSC 
      could provide volume homeostasis that also enhances distal Na(+) delivery, and
      ultimately enhances renal K(+) excretion. In the model DCT, proton secretion is
      blunted by peritubular HCO(3)(-), so that there is little contribution by this
      segment to the maintenance of metabolic alkalosis. During alkalosis, the model
      predicts that increasing luminal NaCl concentration enhances NHE flux, so that
      these calculations provide no support for a role of early DCT in recovery from
      Cl(-) depletion alkalosis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Dept. of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell Univ., 1300 
      York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):F699-720. Epub 2005 Apr 26.


PMID- 1591532
TI  - Analysis of volume regulation in an epithelial cell model.
AB  - An epithelial cell is modeled as a single compartment, bounded by apical and
      basolateral cell membranes, and containing two nonelectrolyte solute species,
      nominally NaCl and KCl. Membrane transport of these species may be metabolically 
      driven, or it may follow the transmembrane concentration gradients, either singly
      (a channel) or jointly (a cotransporter). To represent the effect of
      stretch-activated channels or shrinkage-activated cotransporters, the membrane
      permeabilities and cotransport coefficients are permitted to be functions of cell
      volume. When this epithelium is considered as a dynamical system, conditions are 
      indicated which guarantee the uniqueness and stability of equilibria.
      Experimentally, many epithelial cells can regulate their volume, and such volume 
      regulatory capability is defined for this model. It is clearly distinct from
      dynamical stability of the equilibrium and requires more stringent conditions on 
      the volume-dependent permeabilities and cotransporters. For a previously
      developed model of the toad urinary bladder (Strieter et al., 1990, J. gen.
      Physiol. 96, 319-344) the uniqueness and stability of its equilibria are
      indicated. The analysis also demonstrates that under some conditions a second
      stable equilibrium may appear, along with a saddle-node bifurcation. This is
      illustrated numerically in a modified model of the epithelium of the thick
      ascending limb of Henle.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College,
      Rogosin Kidney Center, New York Hospital, New York.
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 1992 Jul;54(4):537-61.


PMID- 17213461
TI  - Flow-dependent transport in a mathematical model of rat proximal tubule.
AB  - The mathematical model of rat proximal tubule has been extended to include
      calculation of microvillous torque and to incorporate torque-dependent solute
      transport in a compliant tubule. The torque calculation follows that of Du Z, Yan
      Q, Duan Y, Weinbaum S, Weinstein AM, and Wang T (Am J Physiol 290: F289-F296,
      2006). In the model calculations, torque-dependent scaling of luminal membrane
      transporter density [either as an ensemble or just type 3 Na(+)/H(+) exchanger
      (NHE3) alone] had a relatively small impact on overall Na(+) reabsorption and
      could produce a lethal derangement of cell volume; coordinated regulation of
      luminal and peritubular transporters was required to represent the overall impact
      of luminal flow on Na(+) reabsorption. When the magnitude of torque-dependent
      Na(+) reabsorption in the model agrees with that observed in mouse proximal
      tubules, the model tubule shows nearly perfect perfusion-absorption balance at
      high luminal perfusion rates, but enhanced sensitivity of reabsorption at low
      flow. With a slightly lower coefficient for torque-sensitive transporter
      insertion, perfusion-absorption balance in the model tubule is closer to
      observations in the rat over a broader range of inlet flows. In simulation of
      hyperglycemia, torque-dependent transport attenuated the diuretic effect and
      brought the model tubule into closer agreement with experimental observation in
      the rat. The model was also extended to represent finite rates of hydration and
      dehydration of CO(2) and H(2)CO(3). With carbonic anhydrase inhibition,
      torque-dependent transport blunted the diuretic effect and enhanced the shift
      from paracellular to transcellular NaCl reabsorption. The new features of this
      model tubule are an important step toward simulation of glomerulotubular balance.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Dept. of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell Univ., 1300 
      York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
AU  - Weinbaum S
AU  - Duan Y
AU  - Du Z
AU  - Yan Q
AU  - Wang T
GR  - R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - R01-DK-62289/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Apr;292(4):F1164-81. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

PMID- 1750518
TI  - Coupled water transport by rat proximal tubule.
AB  - Simultaneous microperfusion of proximal tubules and peritubular capillaries in
      kidneys of rats anesthetized with Inactin was used to examine water reabsorption 
      by this epithelium. Osmolality of the luminal solution was varied with changes in
      NaCl concentration and by the addition of raffinose. Capillary perfusates
      contained either low (2 g/dl) or high (16 g/dl) concentrations of albumin. We
      used low-bicarbonate perfusates for both lumen and capillary so that we might
      apply the nonequilibrium thermodynamic model of transport for a single solute
      (NaCl) to interpret our observations. Linear regression with the volume flux
      equation Jv = -Lp delta II - Lp sigma delta C + Jav (where Jv is volume flux, Lp 
      is hydraulic conductance, delta II is oncotic force, sigma is osmotic reflection 
      coefficient, delta C is salt concentration difference, and Jav is the component
      of Jv not attributed to transepithelial hydrostatic or osmotic forces) revealed a
      tubule water permeability (Pf = 0.11 +/- 0.01 cm/s) and a sigma (0.74 +/- 0.08)
      in agreement with previous determinations. These transport parameters were
      unaffected by changes in peritubular protein. We also found that Jav was
      substantial, approximately three-fourths of the rate of isotonic transport under 
      these perfusion conditions. Further, this component of water transport nearly
      doubled with the transition from low- to high-protein peritubular capillary
      perfusion. When expressed as a capacity for water reabsorption against an osmotic
      gradient, the salt concentration differences required to null volume flux were
      13.2 +/- 2.4 and 29.4 +/- 4.0 mosmol/kgH2O under low and high peritubular
      protein. Our data suggest that this protein effect is, most likely, an increase
      in solute transport by the tubule epithelial cells.
AU  - Green R
AD  - Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
AU  - Giebisch G
AU  - Unwin R
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - DK-17433/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1991 Dec;261(6 Pt 2):F1046-54.


PMID- 17879871
TI  - Modeling epithelial cell homeostasis: steady-state analysis.
AB  - Critical to epithelial cell viability is the homeostasis of cell volume and
      composition during changes in transcellular transport. In this study, two
      previously developed mathematical models (principal cell of the collecting duct
      and proximal tubule cell) are approximated by their linearizations about a
      reference condition. This yields matrices which estimate cell volume, cell
      composition, and transcellular fluxes in response to perturbations of bath
      conditions and membrane transporter activity. These approximations are themselves
      extended with the inclusion of linear dependence of membrane transport
      coefficients on cell variables (e.g., volume, solute concentrations, or
      electrical potential). This provides cell models with variable permeabilities,
      which may be homeostatic, and which can be examined systematically: sequentially 
      testing each membrane permeability and its controlling cell variable. In the
      proximal tubule approximation, volume-mediated increases in peritubular K-Cl or
      Na-3HCO3 cotransport, and volume-mediated decreases in Na,K-ATPase activity are
      homeostatic; modulation of peritubular K permeability has little impact. In the
      principal cell model, volume homeostasis is afforded by volume-sensitive
      peritubular Na/H exchange or Cl- conductance. Predictions from the linear
      analysis are confirmed in the full models. This approach yields a systematic
      examination of homeostasis in an epithelial model, and identifies candidate
      control parameters.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
      University, 1300 York Avenue, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 1999 Nov;61(6):1065-91.


PMID- 2316669
TI  - Glomerulotubular balance in a mathematical model of the proximal nephron.
AB  - A nonelectrolyte model of proximal tubule epithelium has been extended by the
      inclusion of a compliant tight junction. Here "compliance" signifies that both
      the junctional salt and water permeability increase and the salt reflection
      coefficient decreases in response to small pressure differences from lateral
      interspace to tubule lumen. In previous models of rat proximal tubule, there has 
      been virtually no sensitivity of isotonic salt transport to changes in
      peritubular oncotic force. With the inclusion of junctional compliance, decreases
      in peritubular protein can open the junction and produce a secretory salt flux.
      Thus the model can represent the "backflux hypothesis," as it was originally put 
      forth (J. E. Lewy and E. E. Windhager, Am. J. Physiol. 214: 943-954, 1968).
      Additional calculations, simulating a tight junction with negligible water
      permeability, reveal that the quantitative impact of peritubular protein can be
      realized whether or not there is substantial junctional water flux. The
      epithelial model of proximal tubule has also been incorporated into a model of
      the proximal nephron, complete with glomerulus, peritubular capillary, and
      interstitium. The interstitial compartment is well mixed and interstitial
      pressure and osmolality are determined iteratively to achieve balance between
      tubule reabsorption and capillary uptake. For this model, two domains of
      operation are identified. When interstitial pressures are low, junctions are
      closed, and filtration fraction has no effect on proximal reabsorption. When
      interstitial pressures are relatively elevated, epithelial junctions are open,
      and proximal salt reabsorption changes in proportion to changes in filtration
      fraction. In neither domain, however, does the model tubule augment salt flux
      with isolated increases in luminal flow rate (at constant filtration fraction).
      The absence of a separate effect of tubule fluid flow on salt transport precludes
      perfect glomerulotubular balance.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College,
      Rogosin Kidney Center, New York Hospital, New York 10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1990 Mar;258(3 Pt 2):F612-26.


PMID- 3279817
TI  - Modeling the proximal tubule: complications of the paracellular pathway.
AB  - When the proximal tubule epithelium is represented as cellular and lateral
      intercellular (LIS) compartments, the presence of a paracellular pathway can
      render the overall phenomenologic equations quite an indirect representation of
      intraepithelial transport processes. 1) Active sodium transport into the LIS may 
      create a hypertonic region that drives water movement from lumen to peritubular
      blood, i.e., a term for active water transport may appear in the overall
      transport equations. The correlate of this uphill water flux is a solute
      polarization effect, such that the measured epithelial water permeability is less
      than that of the cell membranes. 2) Basolateral uptake of potassium by the cell
      may lower the LIS concentration and promote diffusive entry of K across the tight
      junction. Even without cellular uptake of K from the lumen, the epithelial
      transport equations may contain a term for active K reabsorption. The solute
      polarization correlate is a low epithelial reflection coefficient that does not
      represent a convective flux of K through a specific channel. 3) When there is
      convective flux of Na and Cl through the tight junction but none through the
      cell, then a fluid circuit around junction and cell may be present, even when net
      epithelial volume flux is absent. In this case, part of the net epithelial Cl
      flux must be represented in the overall transport equations as electroneutral
      Na-Cl cotransport.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College,
      Rogosin Kidney Center, New York Hospital, New York 10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1988 Mar;254(3 Pt 2):F297-305.


PMID- 3697554
TI  - An equation for flow in the renal proximal tubule.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1-AM-29857/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 1986;48(1):29-57.


PMID- 3706537
TI  - A mathematical model of the rat proximal tubule.
AB  - The equations of mass conservation and electroneutrality are used to extend a
      nonequilibrium thermodynamic model of the rat proximal tubule epithelium to a
      representation of a 0.5-cm segment of tubule. The output of the tubule model
      includes the luminal profiles and absolute proximal reabsorption of Na, K, Cl,
      HCO3, HPO4, H2PO4, glucose, and urea, generated by the epithelial model.
      Transport rates and permeabilities, chosen in agreement with those of the rat,
      result in luminal glucose and bicarbonate depletion and a transition from an
      electronegative to positive lumen. Despite the development of significant
      transepithelial osmotic driving forces (a transepithelial glucose gradient and
      Cl-HCO3 asymmetry), intraepithelial solute-solvent coupling remains an important 
      force for water reabsorption along the proximal tubule length. In particular,
      this means that when osmotic gradients that appear under free-flow conditions are
      used in the calculation of the epithelial water permeability, a substantial
      overestimate of this permeability will be obtained. A single first-order
      differential equation has been derived in conjunction with an approximate
      nonelectrolyte model of the proximal tubule that represents both coupled and
      gradient-driven water reabsorption. In the present work, this equation is shown
      to yield an accurate description of water transport by the comprehensive tubule
      model.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1-AM-29857/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1986 May;250(5 Pt 2):F860-73.


PMID- 3706538
TI  - Osmotic diuresis in a mathematical model of the rat proximal tubule.
AB  - Solute reabsorption in the presence of an osmotic load has been examined in a
      model of the rat proximal convoluted tubule. The model is a computer simulation
      of a 0.5-cm segment of tubule comprised of compliant cellular and paracellular
      compartments, which tracks the luminal profiles of Na, K, Cl, HCO3, phosphate,
      glucose, and urea. In one series of calculations, the peritubular and initial
      luminal glucose concentrations are varied from 1.0 to 50 mmol/liter. The
      resulting proximal reabsorption of glucose increases monotonically to 1.5 nmol X 
      s-1 X cm-2. Sodium reabsorption increases with glucose perfusion concentrations
      between 1.0 and 10 mmol/liter and then declines with greater glucose loads. Above
      10 mmol/liter glucose, there is progressive decline in mean luminal Na
      concentration so that diffusive paracellular backflux, as well as decreased
      convective reabsorption, are responsible for the natriuresis. Diuresis per se
      blunts reabsorption of species requiring the development of lumen-to-bath
      concentration gradients (i.e., K, Cl, and urea). Diminished bicarbonate
      reabsorption is also predicted with large glucose loads due to intraepithelial
      alkalinization. This derives both from cellular depolarization and bicarbonate
      trapping (interspace closure). It is also observed that when interspace closure
      occurs, a region of intraepithelial K depletion may be formed, promoting
      diffusive reabsorption of potassium across the tight junction. Thus a 'middle
      compartment model' for potassium may provide a means of achieving tubule
      fluid-to-plasma K ratios less than 1.0, in the absence of specific cellular
      uptake mechanisms.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1 AM-29857/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1986 May;250(5 Pt 2):F874-84.


PMID- 3867306
TI  - Glucose transport in a model of the rat proximal tubule epithelium.
AU  - Weinstein AM
SO  - Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1985;456:136-8.


PMID- 6264088
TI  - Models of coupled salt and water transport across leaky epithelia.
AB  - A general formulation is presented for the verification of isotonic transport and
      for the assignment of a degree of osmotic coupling in any epithelial model. In
      particular, it is shown that the concentration of the transported fluid in the
      presence of exactly equal bathing media is, in general, not a sufficient
      calculation by which to decide the issue of isotonicity of transport. Within this
      framework, two epithelial models are considered: (1) A nonelectrolyte compartment
      model of the lateral intercellular space is presented along with its
      linearization about the condition of zero flux. This latter approximate model is 
      shown to be useful in the estimation of deviation from isotonicity,
      intraepithelial solute polarization effects, and the capacity to transport water 
      against a gradient. In the case of uphill water transport, some limitations of a 
      model of fixed geometry are indicated and the advantage of modeling a compliant
      interspace is suggested. (2) A comprehensive model of cell and channel is
      described which includes the major electrolytes and the possible presence of
      intraepithelial gradients. The general approach to verification of isotonicity is
      illustrated for this numerical model. In addition, the insights about parameter
      dependence gained from the linear compartment model are shown to be applicable to
      understanding this large simulation.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AU  - Stephenson JL
SO  - J Membr Biol. 1981 May 15;60(1):1-20.


PMID- 6496750
TI  - Transport by epithelia with compliant lateral intercellular spaces: asymmetric
      oncotic effects across the rat proximal tubule.
AB  - Mathematical models of the proximal tubule are considered in which the lateral
      intercellular spaces distend in response to increased interstitial pressures and 
      basal outlet permeabilities increase as a result of interspace widening. An
      approximate analytical model of the interspace reveals the possibility that such 
      compliance may introduce an asymmetry to the effect of protein oncotic forces on 
      transepithelial volume flow. Peritubular oncotic forces close the interspace,
      enhance interspace hypertonicity, and thus substantially increase volume
      reabsorption (enhanced intraepithelial solute-solvent coupling). The model also
      predicts a decline in epithelial water permeability (Lp), salt reflection
      coefficient, and salt permeability, with the application of peritubular protein. 
      When parameters are chosen so as to represent the rat proximal tubule, the
      predicted effect on solute permeability is comparable to the observed changes in 
      electrical resistance of the epithelium. However, when the luminal solution is
      slightly hypotonic to blood and proximal reabsorption has become isosmotic, the
      models show relatively small protein effects, which are dependent upon cell and
      tight junction permeabilities and are little influenced by interspace compliance.
      The capability of such models to represent the peritubular protein enhancement of
      isosmotic salt and water reabsorption by the proximal tubule in vivo is
      questioned.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1-AM-29857/AM/NIADDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1984 Nov;247(5 Pt 2):F848-62.


PMID- 8010757
TI  - Mathematical models of tubular transport.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Medicine, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York
      10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Annu Rev Physiol. 1994;56:691-709.


PMID- 8067384
TI  - Ammonia transport in a mathematical model of rat proximal tubule.
AB  - Pathways for ammonia transport have been incorporated within a model of rat
      proximal tubule [A. M. Weinstein. Am. J. Physiol. 263 (Renal Fluid Electrolyte
      Physiol. 32): F784-F798, 1992]. The luminal membrane includes a Na+/NH4+
      exchanger, while at the peritubular membrane there is uptake of NH4+ on the
      Na(+)-K(+)-adenosinetriphosphatase (Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase); both luminal and
      peritubular cell membranes contain conductive pathways for NH4+. The model
      equations have been expanded to include cellular ammoniagenesis. The principal
      focus of this study is the interplay of forces that can raise proximal tubule
      fluid total ammonia concentration 10-fold higher than in arterial plasma.
      Analysis of a cellular model reveals that luminal membrane Na+/NH4+ exchange,
      cellular production of ammonia, and peritubular membrane NH4+ uptake (via
      Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase or via K+ channel) all act in parallel to drive ammonia
      secretion. This derives from the cellular interconversion of NH4+ and NH3 and the
      free permeation of NH3 across cell membranes. It implies that inhibition of the
      luminal membrane transporter does not block the contribution of peritubular
      uptake to the overall active transport of ammonia. Conversely, when inhibition of
      the luminal membrane Na+/NH4+ entry (i.e., Na+/H+ inhibition) depresses
      transcellular Na+ flux, then the decrease of NH4+ flux through the peritubular
      Na+ pump enhances the apparent importance of the luminal membrane pathway. This
      analysis is confirmed in the numerical calculations and is a departure from the
      Ussing paradigm of series membrane Na+ transport. Although active secretion of
      ammonia by this tubule is substantial, the relative contribution of luminal
      Na+/NH4+ exchange and of peritubular uptake via the Na+ pump remains uncertain.
      The determination of peritubular capillary NH4+ concentration will be crucial to 
      resolving this uncertainty, with lower concentration (i.e., closer to systemic
      arterial ammonia) obligating greater luminal membrane Na+/NH4+ exchange.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021.
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1994 Aug;267(2 Pt 2):F237-48.


PMID- 8087078
TI  - Weak acid permeability of a villous membrane: formic acid transport across rat
      proximal tubule.
AB  - Chloride/formate exchange, in parallel with Na+/H+ exchange and nonionic
      diffusion of H2CO2, has been proposed as a mechanism of electroneutral
      transcellular Cl- reabsorption by the proximal tubule. However, the measured
      brush border H2CO2 permeability of the rat proximal tubule is at least an order
      of magnitude too low to support sufficient H2CO2 recycling. To investigate the
      possibility that an unstirred layer within the brush border might depress the
      measured H2CO2 permeability, we constructed a mathematical model of a villous
      membrane. Axial fluxes along villous and intervillous spaces were specified by
      Nernst-Planck diffusion equations. Model parameters were set to achieve agreement
      with ion and water fluxes measured in the rat proximal tubule. The equations were
      solved numerically to generate steady-state concentration profiles in the villous
      and intervillous spaces. An apparent brush border H2CO2 permeability was
      determined by perturbing luminal [H2CO2] and calculating the change in H2CO2
      flux. Overall, the ratio of apparent brush border H2CO2 permeability to cell
      membrane H2CO2 permeability was greater than 90%. Contributing to the small
      decrease in apparent permeability are finite diffusion coefficients, folding of
      the membrane, and acidification of the luminal solution. An approximate analysis 
      of this system shows the critical parameters of brush border formate transport to
      be the actual membrane H2CO2 permeability, and the diffusion coefficients of
      HCO2- and HCO3-. Nevertheless, decreasing the diffusion coefficients by one order
      of magnitude failed to depress apparent brush border H2CO2 permeability by more
      than an additional 25%. We conclude that although permeability is systematically 
      underestimated across a villous membrane, unstirred layer effects in the brush
      border are still too small to resolve the discrepancy between the measured value 
      of H2CO2 permeability and the value needed to allow recycling.
AU  - Krahn TA
AD  - Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
AU  - Aronson PS
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - DK-17433/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
GR  - T32DK07276/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 1994 May;56(3):459-90.


PMID- 8760257
TI  - Coupling of entry to exit by peritubular K+ permeability in a mathematical model 
      of rat proximal tubule.
AB  - In the proximal tubule in vivo, glomerulotubular balance requires that tubule
      epithelial cells accommodate a twofold variation in Na+ reabsorption through the 
      Na+/H+ exchanger of the luminal membrane. In a mathematical model of proximal
      tubule, in which permeability coefficients are fixed, doubling flux through the
      Na+/H+ antiporter produces a substantial increase in cell volume and cytosolic
      HCO3-. In this model, it is possible to vary peritubular K+ permeability with
      changes in luminal Na+ entry, so that cell volume is constrained to be constant. 
      In these calculations, the model predicts that peritubular hyperpolarization and 
      nearly constant cytosolic HCO3- will accompany increases in luminal Na+ entry.
      Realistic models of variable peritubular K+ permeability might include a
      functional dependence on flux through the Na(+)-K(+)-adenosinetriphosphatase,
      cytosolic pH, or cell volume. When K+ permeability is represented as a function
      of any of these variables, homeostatic control of cell volume and pH can be
      obtained over a physiological variation of Na+/H+ flux. However, when luminal Na+
      entry is via Na(+)-glucose cotransport, volume homeostasis is best when
      peritubular K+ permeability depends on the rate of active Na+ transport. For any 
      modulator of K+ permeability, realistic constraints on the value of this
      parameter suggest that peritubular K+ permeability is, by itself, not sufficient 
      to maintain cell volume within narrow limits. Parallel activation of another exit
      pathway, such as peritubular Na(+)-3 HCO3- cotransport, may be required to
      achieve the necessary homeostasis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021, USA.
GR  - I-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1996 Jul;271(1 Pt 2):F158-68.


PMID- 8779897
TI  - Acid/base transport in a model of the proximal tubule brush border: impact of
      carbonic anhydrase.
AB  - A mathematical model of the brush border of the proximal tubule (T. A. Krahn, P. 
      S. Aronson, and A. M. Weinstein. Bull. Math. Biol, 56: 459-490, 1994) has been
      extended by the inclusion of CO2 and H2CO3 as diffusible species and by the
      inclusion of finite rate constants for the hydration of CO2. This permits the
      simulation of carbonic anhydrase (CA) activity and its inhibition. We confirm the
      result of our previous study, which is that, in the presence of CA, the unstirred
      layer has only a modest effect on the observed formic acid permeability. CA
      inhibition results in disequilibrium pH gradients, and the effect of these
      gradients on formic acid permeability depends on the presence of other membrane
      transport proteins. We also examined the impact of CA activity on the flux of
      total CO2 through the brush border. Under physiological conditions, CA inhibition
      depressed NaHCO3 reabsorption through the brush border by interfering with the
      HCO3(-)-facilitated diffusion of CO2. However, the determination of brush-border 
      CO2 permeability, using an imposed CO2 gradient, was relatively uninfluenced by
      CA activity. Finally, we inserted a kinetic representation of the Na+/H+
      exchanger into the brush-border model. Even when luminal and cytosolic diffusion 
      coefficients were increased 1,000-fold, there was no effect on brush-border Na+
      flux. This suggests that variations in the unstirred layer cannot be responsible 
      for the flow dependence of Na+ reabsorption.
AU  - Krahn TA
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021, USA.
AU  - Weinstein AM
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1996 Feb;270(2 Pt 2):F344-55.


PMID- 9136277
TI  - Dynamics of cellular homeostasis: recovery time for a perturbation from
      equilibrium.
AB  - In the collecting duct in vivo, the principal cell encounters a wide range in
      luminal flow rate and luminal concentration of NaCl. As a consequence, there are 
      substantial variations in the transcellular fluxes of Na+ and Cl-, conditions
      which would be expected to perturb cell volume and cytosolic concentrations.
      Several control mechanisms have been identified which can potentially blunt these
      perturbations, and these entail cellular regulation of the luminal membrane Na+
      channel and peritubular membrane K+ and Cl- channels. To illustrate the impact of
      these regulated channels, a mathematical model of the principal cell of the rat
      cortical collecting duct has been developed, in which ion channel permeabilities 
      are either constant or regulated. In comparison to the model with fixed
      permeabilities, the model with regulated channels demonstrates enhanced cellular 
      homeostasis following steady-state variation in luminal NaCl. However, in the
      transient response to a cytosolic perturbation, the difference in recovery time
      between the models is small. An approximate analysis is presented which casts
      these models as dynamical systems with constant coefficients. Despite the
      presence of regulated ion channels, concordance of each model with its linear
      approximation is verified for experimentally meaningful perturbations from the
      reference condition. Solution of a Lyapunov equation for each linear system
      yields a matrix whose application to a perturbation permits explicit estimation
      of the time to recovery. Comparison of these solution matrices for regulated and 
      non-regulated cells confirms the similarity of the dynamic response of the two
      models. These calculations suggest that enhanced homeostasis by regulated
      channels may be protective, without necessarily hastening recovery from cellular 
      perturbations.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Bull Math Biol. 1997 May;59(3):451-81.


PMID- 9612321
TI  - A mathematical model of the inner medullary collecting duct of the rat: pathways 
      for Na and K transport.
AB  - A mathematical model of the inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) of the rat has
      been developed representing Na+, K+, Cl-, HCO3-, CO2, H2CO3, phosphate, ammonia, 
      and urea. Novel model features include: finite rates of hydration of CO2, a
      kinetic representation of the H-K-ATPase within the luminal cell membrane,
      cellular osmolytes that are regulated in defense of cell volume, and the repeated
      coalescing of IMCD tubule segments to yield the ducts of Bellini. Model transport
      is such that when entering Na+ is 4% of filtered Na+, approximately 75% of this
      load is reabsorbed. This requirement renders the area-specific transport rate for
      Na+ comparable to that for proximal tubule. With respect to the luminal membrane,
      there is experimental evidence for both NaCl cotransport and an Na+ channel in
      parallel. The experimental constraints that transepithelial potential difference 
      is small and that the fractional apical resistance is greater than 85% mandate
      that more than 75% of luminal Na+ entry be electrically silent. When Na+ delivery
      is limited, an NaCl cotransporter can be effective at reducing luminal Na+
      concentration to the observed low urinary values. Given the rate of transcellular
      Na+ reabsorption, there is necessarily a high rate of peritubular K+ recycling;
      also, given the lower bound on luminal membrane Cl- reabsorption, substantial
      peritubular Cl- flux must be present. Thus, if realistic limits on cell membrane 
      electrical resistance are observed, then this model predicts a requirement for
      peritubular electroneutral KCl exit.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021, USA.
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1998 May;274(5 Pt 2):F841-55.


PMID- 9612322
TI  - A mathematical model of the inner medullary collecting duct of the rat: acid/base
      transport.
AB  - A mathematical model of the inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) of the rat has
      been developed that is suitable for simulating luminal buffer titration and
      ammonia secretion by this nephron segment. Luminal proton secretion has been
      assigned to an H-K-ATPase, which has been represented by adapting the kinetic
      model of the gastric enzyme by Brzezinski et al. (P. Brzezinski, B. G. Malmstrom,
      P. Lorentzon, and B. Wallmark. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 942: 215-219, 1988). In
      shifting to a 2 H+:1 ATP stoichiometry, the model enzyme can acidify the tubule
      lumen approximately 3 pH units below that of the cytosol, when luminal K+ is in
      abundance. Peritubular base exit is a combination of ammonia recycling and HCO3- 
      flux (either via Cl-/HCO3- exchange or via a Cl- channel). Ammonia recycling
      involves NH4(+) uptake on the Na-K-ATPase followed by diffusive NH3 exit [S. M.
      Wall. Am. J. Physiol. 270 (Renal Physiol. 39): F432-F439, 1996]; model
      calculations suggest that this is the principal mode of base exit. By virtue of
      this mechanism, the model also suggests that realistic elevations in peritubular 
      K+ concentration will compromise IMCD acid secretion. Although ammonia recycling 
      is insensitive to carbonic anhydrase (CA) inhibition, the base exit linked to
      HCO3- flux provides a CA-sensitive component to acid secretion. In model
      simulations, it is observed that increased luminal NaCl entry increases ammonia
      cycling but decreases peritubular Cl-/HCO3- exchange (due to increased cell Cl-).
      This parallel system of peritubular base exit stabilizes acid secretion in the
      face of variable Na+ reabsorption.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, New York 10021, USA.
GR  - 1-RO1-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Am J Physiol. 1998 May;274(5 Pt 2):F856-67.


PMID- 9730663
TI  - Insights from mathematical modeling of renal tubular function.
AB  - Mathematical models of proximal tubule have been developed which represent the
      important solute species within the constraints of known cytosolic
      concentrations, transport fluxes, and overall epithelial permeabilities. In
      general, model simulations have been used to assess the quantitative feasibility 
      of what appear to be qualitatively plausible mechanisms, or alternatively, to
      identify incomplete rationalization of experimental observations. The examples
      considered include: (1) proximal water reabsorption, for which the lateral
      interspace is a locus for solute-solvent coupling; (2) ammonia secretion, for
      which the issue is prioritizing driving forces - transport on the Na+/H+
      exchanger, on the Na,K-ATPase, or ammoniagenesis; (3) formate-stimulated NaCl
      reabsorption, for which simple addition of a luminal membrane chloride/formate
      exchanger fails to represent experimental observation, and (4) balancing luminal 
      entry and peritubular exit, in which ATP-dependent peritubular K+ channels have
      been implicated, but appear unable to account for the bulk of proximal tubule
      cell volume homeostasis.
AU  - Weinstein AM
AD  - Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College, New 
      York, NY 10021, USA. alan@nephron.med.cornell.edu
GR  - 1-R01-DK-29857/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States
SO  - Exp Nephrol. 1998 Sep-Oct;6(5):462-8.

